## Research Meta-Analysis Introduction

In this blog post, I will be doing a research meta-analysis on the PNAS research article “Lifestyle and mental health disruptions during COVID-19.” The authors of the blog are Osea Giuntella, Kelly Hyde, Silvia Saccardo, and Sally Sadoff. Among them, at the time of the publishing of the article, none of them were tenured professors, but only Osea Giuntella was well on the track to be one. Giuntella and Hyde are professors at the University of Pittsburgh in the Department of Economics. Saccardo is in the Department of Social and Decision Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University, and Sadoff works at the Rady School of Management at UCSD. On average, all of them seemed to have rather successful careers up to this point except for Hyde, who was still up and coming. 

The drive to conduct the study originated from care for the well-being of the students, given that they were enrolled in the same university in which two of the researchers were professors. Funds for the study came from J-PAL North America, a very ethical research center that works to reduce poverty through informed policy. In other words, the study was probably conducted from a caring perspective.

## Meta-Analysis

The null and alternative hypothesis is as follows: “Disruptions to physical activity and mental health are strongly associated, but restoration of physical activity through a short-term intervention does not help improve mental health.” This is shown in the paper using longitudinal datasets that use biometric and survey data across three cohorts of students across three semesters at the University of Pittsburgh. Each cohort belonged to a semester, between February 2019 to April 2020, with a subset of the third cohort choosing to continue to participate in the study from April into July. They recorded the data by giving each of 682 unique students across the three cohorts a Fitbit to measure their levels of physical activity, as well as a baseline and endline CES-D assessment to use depression state as a representative of mental health. Given the nature of the data being about personal life and movement tracking, the datasets are not available to the public. However, graphs and calculated data are provided in the paper.

The data includes information taken from the provided Fitbit, including the number of physical steps taken during the day, as well as physical activity based on heart rate and movement. They classified physical activity as movement incurring a heart rate above a certain threshold as well as occurring over an extended period of time. They also checked nightly sleep, socialization time, screen time, and depression rate in comparison to before and during the pandemic. Students who lost jobs also had extra consideration for this facet of their personal life. However, the study only researched college students, a very stressed and depressed group, so it may not have been representative of the general population. Apart from that, the study was very well put together. 

They compiled the data and used it to create multiple graphs. All of their analyses had incredibly low P-values. They used two different regression models (diff-in-diff and fixed-effects) to show that physical activity, sleep, social interactions, screen time, and depression had significant changes throughout the study. The graphs showed Spring 2019 vs. Spring 2020 for steps, physical activity, sleep duration, and wake-up time. They did the same for February vs. April in 2019 and 2020 but instead showed screen time and social interactions. The depression data taken from the CES-D survey results for assessment of depression were bar-graphed. On this, they separated disruptions to lifestyle as either smaller or larger disruptions and showed the CES-D assessment results against individual disruptions in another bar graph. They also used a tree-based classification algorithm powered by machine learning, XGBoost, to identify risk factors comparatively from before and during. They ended up with the conclusion that disruptions to daily habits were not as impactful on mental health as before the pandemic; however, during the pandemic, maintaining a healthy lifestyle put you at a much lower risk of depression. 

They also ended up at the conclusion that intervention, such as incentivized physical activity, had no impact on the mental well-being of the students long-term, by incentivizing the subset of the third cohort that chose to continue the study to move more during the day for a small quantity of money.

## Conclusion

Ultimately, I do not believe publish or perish had an effect on this study. Two of the authors looked like they were in an increasingly comfortable position over time and this paper was published at the cusp of their success. The other two were less accomplished, but given the reasons for interest, I believe this paper was not very influenced by publish or perish. Furthermore, the topic of research was not incredibly groundbreaking, and similar conclusions could be drawn by considering other previous research. However, the “puzzling” fact about the research that short-term intervention had no impact on mental health does not seem all that crazy considering almost everything needs commitment to be successful. In all, this was a well-conducted and well-purposed study with reasonable conclusions.

